---
layout: post
title: "Kaladin"
date: 2022-05-21 16:30:00 -0700
categories: jekyll update
---

In the Stormlight Archive, the character most strongly linked with 'good' is Kaladin.
His entire character arc revolves around giving everything to protect others, and a single
loss is enough to send him into a deep spiral of depression. At the forefront of his
mentality is the view of sides. As a young spearman, he was trained to care when he
fought, to care about the people beside and behind him. Not the people in front. After
the events of the tower, when the Parshendi display more humanity and honor than the
humans he has fought alongside, he begins to question this belief.

This comes to a head in Oathbringer, when he is forced to decide between a group of
singer slaves he taught how to survive, and his king and friends during a mission gone
wrong. Caught between the two choices, he breaks down, stops fighting, and begs both
sides to stop killing. None do.

Kaladin's story shows the lies in every situation where people are told to form sides,
and for him, the only option is to accept that he can't save everyone. For us, the readers,
the people living in this world, the only option left to us is to do our best to choose
the right things at the right time and hope for the best. Politics is a good example.
Most people in the last election voted for the lesser evil rather than the greater good,
or just voted along party lines. This isn't sustainable, and will end poorly without
change.
